Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Before Ivo Junek enlisted in the Army, he was a member of the Tree Army.
It's also known as the Civilian Conservation Corps.
A member of the 91st Infantry Division in the European Theater, he spent most of his combat days in Italy.
While he was serving in Europe, his three brothers served in World War II in the Pacific.
Please welcome with me a proud native of Snook and World War II Gunner.
Ivo Junek.
Ivo, it's a pleasure to have you on Veterans of the Valley.
I want to jump forward, and then we'll jump back to your getting into the service, but I want to jump forward to you and your brothers all serving in World War II at the same time.
This is kind of an oddity.
Obviously, it was done, but you were all serving at the same time, three brothers in the Pacific and you in Europe.
This must have been a matter of some concern for your parents.
Sort of talk about that dynamic of your service.
Well, I'm sure it was because I know they hated to see us go, but they knew it had to be done.
Right.
And you didn't have cell phones and all the communications you have today, so it was sometimes months before we even
Well, by mail, it usually took about a month for the mail to get over to Europe or the Pacific.
I'm sure it wasn't any better.
They made it, but I did have one.
The oldest brother did not go.
He did get his draft call.
That's an interesting story, too, because he was actually at A&M.
He was at Sebesa Hall serving as a cook, I guess, at Sebesa Hall.
And they didn't want him to go because he was serving his country in a way by cooking for the people that were getting ready to go to the military here at Texas A&M.
Talk about him.
Well, yes, he really started at A&M at Sebesa back by 1936.
And, well, he retired from there later years.
but uh yeah and he was really the only one that like my daddy has never driven anything but a model t ford which had the three pedals right so when they needed something uh he would go check on them at least once a week drove the snook find and uh but the draft board was still going to draft him even though he had three children and uh
I do know that someone from Cebesa, and I'm not going to mention names because I'm not positive, but I think I know who it was, wrote the draft board letter that they ought to be ashamed of their self calling him to serve because he had three children, had parents that needed him, and worst of all, he said, we need him as a cook, and he's doing the same job here he will be doing,
after he if he was to go into service right and so it wasn't no time that they sent him a deferment right and he did not have to go so he was here to take care of my parents while we were all gone i want to talk about your own service in world war ii uh talk about that you you did serve in europe you were in infantry 91st infantry division talk about what
your job was.
You were a gunner with a couple of different weapons.
Talk about what you did.
Well, really, the main job was a gunner on a 155 Howardsey.
I was in the 348 Field Artillery Battalion, which is one of the battalions that was in the 91st Division.
There's about 11 different jobs on a gunner on 155s.
You have your chief of section, your ammunition corporal, your gunner, and the cannon, about six cannoneers, I think.
And really in combat, you may have been assigned to a certain post, but everyone did what they had to do.
You may have been on the, on the gun, the, oh, what?
Well, the sites, at one time, then you may have been loaded
loading the shells on the tray, because one of these shells weighed 98 pounds.
Right.
Plus the fuse.
And then you had to have a fuse.
Someone fuse the shell and set the timing.
We had different fuses.
Some were fused that would go off on impact.
Some fuses went off by timing.
At the time, the sedum was given to us from the forward observer, who was usually on a high point in front of us.
You had to carry these shells through the mud.
That's one thing you remember exactly how muddy it was when you were serving in the Apennine Mountains in that area.
Yes, before it froze, it rained and rained.
The trucks could not get into the gun sections, so we had to carry these one by one to the gun section.
It was a mess.
We welcomed the freezing weather.
Right.
You remember the date that it froze, November the 11th when it first froze.
The first snow was what we called Armistice Day.
Right.
November 11th.
And we didn't see the ground again until sometime in March.
Yeah, but it was easier to walk through the snow.
Oh, very much.
It seemed like it wasn't too bad.
The snow wasn't bad at all compared to the drizzling and freezing rain.
Right.
You ought to backtrack a little bit.
You had gone over, when you went over, you landed in Scotland and then from England, you actually went to Normandy Beach.
but didn't stay there because you were then called to Italy, right?
Right.
See, now this was not on D-Day.
By the way, D-Day was my 21st birthday, too.
I see.
This was after.
Yeah, this was a couple of months after D-Day.
Right.
And we went, got far at Cherbourg, and the casualties were heavy in Italy.
So they flew us in the...
on into Italy.
It took us two days.
We stopped to spend the night in Lyon, France, and then flew the rest of the way.
And I didn't think about this the other day, but I was sitting in the pilot's seat.
The pilot went back, put it on automatic power.
I was in charge of the group.
of the soldiers that was on the plane.
And so he put me in his seat while the co-pilot was there, and we were riding along heavy over in the clouds.
And we were flying in formation.
And all of a sudden, we hit a bright spot, no clouds at all, and there was a big old rock sticking out of it.
And so he kind of gave me a little thing.
He said, if you want to go up, you've got to pull back.
If you want to go down,
First time I've ever been in a cockpit of a plane.
And so I pulled it and the other pilot, he did the same thing and we just went up
And we dodged it because we were flying low over the Alps.
Right.
And we flew into Pisa and then we circled.
I saw the leaning tire from there before I saw it on the ground.
Indeed, indeed.
That must have been a little frightening, a rookie pilot looking up and there's a mountain in front of it.
Well, the pilot told me, he says, you know what?
You were as close to death as you'd ever be without dying.
Oh my goodness.
But what I was going to say then, about six or seven years ago, we made several trips back to Europe since.
And we were up in Switzerland and you go up that high,
you don't get the, there's no gasoline engines.
It's all electric, even the tracks pulling you up.
But when we got up there, saw Matterhorn sticking out of the snow and that looked like the same piece of rock that I see.
They ran into.
So I'm not sure that that was it, but it sure looked the same.
And I forgot about that until I saw that piece, that Matterhorn sticking out from under the snow.
You said that there were several consecutive days of resistance that you encountered in the Apennine Mountains.
and that area.
Talk a little bit about that.
You talked about how the enemy would come out of tunnels.
It kind of reminded me of sort of Mount Suribachi at Iwo Jima over Japan, how the Japanese tactics of fighting were sort of the same way, that they would dig tunnels, and that's what you were sort of fighting against.
Sort of talk about the resistance that you saw.
Well, most of the tunnels, they had what we called railroad guns.
They were big guns on a railroad track that pulled them back in,
And they pull out and fire and then pull back in.
And I don't know what side of the shell they fired, but it was big.
And what really helped, I guess, being in artillery was probably one of the safest places being on the front line.
Because even people behind us got shelled with the big guns.
You know, we got strafed in the small fire, but the big fire went over us.
You could hear those projectors going over us.
But, you know, we were, to me, I never felt like, I never really felt, I knew I was in danger, but I mean, I didn't feel like I was going to ever get wounded or killed or anything.
There were a lot of casualties.
but you never felt like you were going to be one of them.
You were doing your job.
Now I did have, I was close enough to catch the explosions where the flash of a, uh, one of my buddies hit my face.
And, but that was, then I did get threatened to part my hair once.
I didn't have my steel helmet on.
I guess that, that taught you something there.
Talk about, uh,
Is it Livonia?
Livignana?
Livignana.
Yeah.
Talk about that.
Well, that... That was in Italy, right?
That was in Italy.
That was between us and Bologna.
Right.
And it's on the north side of the Apennines.
It's a high point.
Good observation point.
And then Mount Madone, I think, was the next one down that was real...
And we, it was supposed to have changed hands three times in one day.
Right.
And when we finally took Liver and Yana and Little Beyond, well, the casualties were terrible.
In fact, there was one corner that the infantryman named Purple Heart Corner.
Because every time they tried to get around there, they got...
Wounded or killed.
But naturally by that time there was freezing, snow was on the ground, and the bodies froze and they'd put them in mattress covers and hauled out on a truck, kind of like, well, like we used to say, stack cordwood.
Right, right.
How old were you at this time?
About.
I was 21.
21.
You were still a young kid from Snook, Texas.
Right.
You said you were just doing your job, but you're a young guy.
There's people shooting at you.
You're shooting at people.
You're seeing bodies.
How does a young man process that?
I don't know, I guess we were trained to do that because I can remember when I first went to Fort Knox, one of the first speeches I've heard, and I don't know if it was a general, a lieutenant, or just another private, but they had us there.
First thing he said, you must learn to kill or get killed.
In other words, you have to learn to kill or get killed.
Right.
I guess that's why, you know, you knew you had things to do.
Now, we were trained for hand-to-hand combat, which I never had to get into.
I would say that that would be probably the worst thing a person would have to do in hand-to-hand combat.
Indeed.
We hear the term so much now since Tom Brokaw invented it, the greatest generation.
But it's stories like this that make us, I think,
find out why they're called the greatest generation, certainly a unique generation as far as how they felt about life and death.
It's different, certainly, than it was today.
I want to go to some photographs because you have some magnificent photographs of you and your outfit and some of your war buddies.
And I'd like to go to those now and have you talk about them.
First off, that's a wonderful portrait of you.
How old were you there?
You look like a rookie there.
When was that taken?
Sometime in 43.
In 43.
Just as you were going in.
Right.
Shortly after I was in, I'd say 43.
It had to be.
Right.
You were inducted in February of 1943, so it was probably right around there.
Good looking soldier.
Let's move on.
What are we looking at there?
Now, that was in training here in the States.
See, that's a self-propelled M7 tank.
That turret there is a 50-caliber machine gun.
And you're holding the shell at the bottom left, right?
Now, those are small.
Those are small.
Those aren't the 98 pounds.
Oh, no.
One person handles those.
Okay.
And that's also in the States.
Right.
Now, what are you sitting on there?
Oh, that's the breech of the gun.
See right where my leg kind of comes over and see those two lines on each side?
That's how the recall comes back on those, all the way to the end.
On those tracks.
And that little hole that's right below me, that's where the shell, you shove it in there and then it closes.
I see.
Okay.
I never noticed that before.
Right.
There's another picture, I guess, same time.
That shows a little bit better.
Well, that's getting ready to load the shell.
Right.
These are marvelous pictures.
Okay, now this is, we haven't really talked about you going overseas, but you left from New York Harbor.
And this picture was taken at Times Square, you and your buddies enjoying a little refreshment before you headed over to Europe, right?
Yes, I found this just a few days ago again.
And that's you on the right?
That's me on the right.
Then there's one next to me.
He was from Minnesota.
His last name is Havisto.
And the third one, I don't remember his name.
I remember the face.
The next one would be a guy named Herod.
And then the next to the last, I don't remember, but the third, the last one was named Ralph Motz.
I still remember those.
I think...
The other two, I don't believe were in our gun sections or maybe not even in our battalion.
Well, it's only 65 years ago, Ivo.
I wouldn't expect you to remember all the names.
That's a long time ago.
Look at the faces, though, there of those soldiers.
And I looked at those faces, and those are guys who are not, you know, they're not under duress.
They're not protesting where they're about to go.
These are guys that you can just see by the look on their face that are proud to go serve in the war.
And they're looking forward to going over.
That's a marvelous picture.
It really is.
Let's move on to the next one.
This is your volleyball team?
That's our volleyball team.
After the war was over, we were up in, right out of Trieste.
They're on the Yugoslav border.
We spent around the first of August there from May, last of May to the first of August.
This must have been June or July.
So we had to have something for a little entertainment.
So we had volleyball teams, volleyball tournaments.
Right.
And that was our team.
I think we won the tournament.
That's where we got our picture.
And I can remember.
You're in the bottom left there again, right?
Right.
Well, actually.
Now, a while ago, we said left was facing it to the left.
Well, as we're looking at the picture, you're on the bottom left.
Is that correct?
Of the picture?
Uh-huh.
Yeah, as we're looking.
Right, right.
Okay, as we're looking at the picture.
And I can't remember the lieutenant's name.
He was a nice guy.
Right.
And I can't remember the other guy's name.
The tall one, let's start from left to right.
Can't remember his name.
The other one, gosh.
That's okay.
I asked the other day.
Now, I remember the one, the tallest one standing there is Jack Patterson from Salt Lake City.
Okay.
His name was J-A-P.
Yeah.
We called him a Jap.
And I talked to him.
I found him...
About four or five years ago, no longer than, about seven years ago, we were going flying to Alaska and we had a layover in Salt Lake City.
So I looked up, Jack A. Patterson, and I called.
And sure enough, it was his home and he was there and I talked to him.
There he was.
And then we kept in contact for a while.
I called last time, last couple of times I called and said there's not a working number, so.
Now he's the fellow on the top right as we're looking at the picture?
As we're facing the picture, to the right.
To the right of standing up.
Standing up.
Yeah, there you go.
All right, let's move on to the next one.
Is that a howitzer?
That's a 155 howitzer.
And that's what we call the ground mount.
Spread those legs out and then they, and
That's about what it took to fire one of those.
Indeed.
Let's move on to the next one because I think we've got, that's pretty much the same group with the howitzer.
It is.
Where's this taken?
You know, that was in the States when we were out in the field.
The ground was frozen.
Right.
That's you out in front.
That's me out in front, yes.
Okay.
I remember a couple of the guys' names yet.
That's okay.
Let's move on to, uh, now these are, are you and your brothers and, uh, it's kind of a rough picture there, but you can, this is taken out of a, a magazine and I believe it says, uh, uh, uh, quartet.
Yes.
Of, uh, Unix from snook in service.
And, uh, so who are we looking at their top left?
Top left is my brother, Ralph.
Uh huh.
Now he was in the Pacific.
He spent about two and a half years, most of the time, or more in the Pacific.
And then the bottom left?
Bottom left is Fred.
Well, he's the oldest of the ones that went in.
Right.
And then the sailor in the middle?
The sailor is in the middle.
Who is that?
And Joe.
Joe?
Okay.
And then that's you on the right.
Right.
Yeah.
And there are the brothers.
Now, this picture was just taken, what, a couple of years ago at the World War II Memorial, right?
Right.
And you all went to visit.
October was a year ago.
Okay.
And that's you and your family.
And children.
No, that's not all the family.
Not all the family.
That's some of the family.
Just children and I think six grandchildren.
Right.
You're sitting there in the middle.
Your wife, Becky, is over there to the left in the back row.
And then you and some children and grandchildren at the World War II Memorial.
I got a chance to visit there this last December.
It's magnificent.
It really is.
Indeed it is.
Those are some great pictures.
I want to backtrack a little bit, Ivo, and talk about you getting into the service, a young man from Snook.
And I know that at first they wanted you to, somebody tried to talk you into being in the Seabees, but you went another direction.
Well, the Naval officer there wanted me to join the Navy.
Right.
He said we needed welders in the Seabees, and I was a welder by trade.
And my leaderman at the shipyard
was all shook up just about a week before that because the Seabees landed on some island in the Pacific before the Marines did and wiped them out.
And I remember that whenever I went there and he was trying to get me to join the Seabees, so I finally said, I just, I mean, joined the Army, the Navy, which they would have been assigned to the Seabees.
Right.
Which would have been a...
a good chance to learn another trade or maybe better myself at the trade I was in.
But I'm not sorry I took the route I did because I did make it back and I don't know what would have happened.
Well, we're not sorry too.
Before we leave and we're running out of time, but Ivo,
You're the first person I know named Ivo.
Talk about that name and how you got that name.
Well, my mother, so I was told, my mother read a book when she was a young girl, The Life of Ivo.
The Life of Ivo.
And she wanted that name.
In fact, when some of her siblings had boys, she'd always tell them, name them Ivo.
I want one of them named Ivo even before she was married.
And so there was one of her nephews was named Ivo.
He lived in Colorado.
Well, he became a school teacher and a football coach down in the valley.
But then finally, I was the fifth born.
And so I got the name of Ivo.
You got the name Ivo.
And until last year, I didn't know what I knew.
that she got the name out of a book, and I knew some other stories, but my three daughters were in, and about four of the grandchildren went to Rome to do some sightseeing, and they were in the trolley going down the street, and my oldest daughter looked at her right.
There she read the sign, Basilica of St.
Ivo.
So next day, they had to go find it, and they even got a picture of it for me.
That's tremendous.
After the war, just to talk briefly, we just got a couple of minutes left.
You went to work for the Lower Colorado River Authority.
You opened a welding shop in Snook, and then you went for a temporary job at Shell Oil in Houston, and that temporary job lasted 38 years, right?
38 years.
What did you do there?
There?
Well, I started out as a general helper, laborer more or less.
Right.
And then...
You know, it was a very good job.
It has a union job.
And as positions come open, you'd sign up.
If you'd want that job, you put your name down.
They call that bidding on a job.
I see.
Well, if you had the seniority to get it, you got it.
But if you didn't, you just stayed where you were till you could.
Well, I had a friend that had worked there for,
uh quite a while in fact he uh he didn't pass his physical for the army or service in world war ii he was working there and he said told my book he said any of these jobs come open bid on them he said you don't have to necessarily stay there if you see something comes open that you like better you can bid on that later right but get your seniority started in the department right so
First job came open was in the warehouse.
And that's where you were.
We're out of time, but I know that that's where you spent your time, 38 years at Shell.
And thank you for being here, but we are out of time.
It all goes too quickly.
It sure does.
Thank you.
Ivo Junek and his wife, Becky, are both cancer survivors.
Both lost their spouses in their retirement years, and they found each other some 18 years ago, and now they enjoy their family.
spending much of their time on their farm near Caldwell.
We salute Ivo Junek for his World War II service as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us again next time on Veterans of the Valley.